docs: concepts folder (#5576)
langflow-ai/langflow: docs/docs/Concepts/concepts-components.md

        return RecursiveCharacterTextSplitter(
            separators=separators,
            chunk_size=self.chunk_size,
            chunk_overlap=self.chunk_overlap,
        )

```

Components include definitions for inputs and outputs, which will be represented in the UI with color-coded ports.

**Input Definition:** Each input (like `IntInput` or `DataInput`) specifies an input's type, name, and display properties, which appear as configurable fields in the component's UI panel.

**Methods:** Components have methods or functions that handle their functionality. This component has two methods.
`get_data_input` retrieves the text data to be split from the component's input. This makes the data available to the class.
`build_text_splitter` creates a `RecursiveCharacterTextSplitter` object by calling its parent class's `build` method. The text is split with the created splitter and passed to the next component.
When used in a flow, this component:

1. Displays its configuration options in the UI.
2. Validates user inputs based on the input types.
3. Processes data using the configured parameters.
4. Passes results to the next component.

> ## Freeze Path

Author: Added freeze vs freeze path
We can add a gif player to the docusaurus config if you want. React-gif player had dependency problems so I removed it during the 3.5 upgrade.

---
title: Components
slug: /concepts-components
---

import Icon from "@site/src/components/icon";

# Langflow components overview

A component is a single building block within a flow with inputs, outputs, functions, and parameters that define its functionality. A single component is like a class within a larger application.

To add a component to a flow, drag it from the **Component** menu to the **Workspace**.

Learn more about components and how they work on this page.

## Component menu

> Each component is unique, but all have a menu bar at the top that looks something like this.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Each component is unique, but all have a menu bar at the top that looks something like the following:
```

<img src="/img/openai-model-component.png" alt="Open AI component" style={{display: 'block', margin: 'auto', width: 300}} />

> Use these controls to do the following:

Reviewer: What do "these controls" refer to? The menu items? It's not clear.

To run a single component, click ▶️ **Play**.

A ✅**Check** indicates that the component ran successfully.

Running a single component with the **Play** button is different from running the entire flow. In a single component run, the `build_vertex` function is called, which builds and runs only the single component with direct inputs provided through the UI (the `inputs_dict` parameter). The  `VertexBuildResult` data is passed to the `build_and_run` method, which calls the component's `build` method and runs it. Unlike running the full flow, running a single component does not automatically execute its upstream dependencies.

## Component ports

Handles (<Icon name="Circle" size="16" aria-label="A circle on the side of a component" />) on the side of a component indicate the types of inputs and outputs that can be connected at that port. Hover over a handle to see connection details.

<img src="/img/prompt-component.png" alt="Prompt component" style={{display: 'block', margin: 'auto', width: 300}} />

### Component port data type colors

The following table lists the handle colors and their corresponding data types:

> | Data Type | Handle Color | Hex Code |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| Data type | Handle color | Hex code |
```

            name="chunk_overlap",
            display_name="Chunk Overlap",
            info="The amount of overlap between chunks.",
            value=200,
        ),
        DataInput(
            name="data_input",
            display_name="Input",
            info="The texts to split.",
            input_types=["Document", "Data"],
        ),
        MessageTextInput(
            name="separators",
            display_name="Separators",
            info='The characters to split on.\nIf left empty defaults to ["\\n\\n", "\\n", " ", ""].',
            is_list=True,
        ),
    ]

    def get_data_input(self) -> Any:
        return self.data_input

    def build_text_splitter(self) -> TextSplitter:
        if not self.separators:
            separators: list[str] | None = None
        else:
            # check if the separators list has escaped characters
            # if there are escaped characters, unescape them
            separators = [unescape_string(x) for x in self.separators]

        return RecursiveCharacterTextSplitter(
            separators=separators,
            chunk_size=self.chunk_size,
            chunk_overlap=self.chunk_overlap,
        )

```

> Components include definitions for inputs and outputs, which will be represented in the UI with color-coded ports.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Components include definitions for inputs and outputs, which are represented in the UI with color-coded ports.
```

**Input Definition:** Each input (like `IntInput` or `DataInput`) specifies an input's type, name, and display properties, which appear as configurable fields in the component's UI panel.

**Methods:** Components have methods or functions that handle their functionality. This component has two methods.
`get_data_input` retrieves the text data to be split from the component's input. This makes the data available to the class.
`build_text_splitter` creates a `RecursiveCharacterTextSplitter` object by calling its parent class's `build` method. The text is split with the created splitter and passed to the next component.
When used in a flow, this component:

1. Displays its configuration options in the UI.
2. Validates user inputs based on the input types.
3. Processes data using the configured parameters.
4. Passes results to the next component.

> ## Freeze Path

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Freeze path
```

After a component runs, **Freeze Path** locks the component's previous output state to prevent it from re-running.

If you’re expecting consistent output from a component and don’t need to re-run it, click **Freeze Path**. 

Enabling **Freeze Path** freezes all components upstream of the selected component.

If you only want to freeze a single component, select **Freeze** instead.

A <Icon name="Snowflake" aria-label="Snowflake"/> icon appears on all frozen components.

## Additional component options

Click <Icon name="Ellipsis" aria-label="Horizontal ellipsis" /> **All** to see additional options for a component.

> To modify a component's name or description, double-click in the **Name** or **Description** fields. Component descriptions accept markdown syntax.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To modify a component's name or description, double-click in the **Name** or **Description** fields. Component descriptions accept Markdown syntax.
```

### Component shortcuts

The following keyboard shortcuts are available when a component is selected.

> | Menu Item | Mac Shortcut | Description |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| Menu item | Mac shortcut | Description |
```

> | Menu Item | Mac Shortcut | Description |

Reviewer: Why are we only showing Mac shortcuts?

Author: Added windows

|-----------|----------|-------------|
| Code | ⌘ + C | Opens the code editor for the component. |
| Advanced | ⌘ + A | Opens advanced settings for the component. |
| Save | ⌘ + S | Saves the current state of the component to Saved components in the sidebar. |
| Duplicate | ⌘ + D | Creates a duplicate of the component. |
| Copy | ⌘ + C | Copies the selected component. Paste it in the workspace with ⌘ + V. |
| Docs | ⌘ + D | Opens related documentation. |
| Minimize | ⌘ + Q | Minimizes the current component. |
| Freeze | ⌘ + F | Freezes the current component state. |
| Freeze Path | ⌘ + Shift + F | Freezes the current component state and all upstream components. |
| Download | ⌘ + D | Downloads the current component as a JSON file. |
| Delete | ⌘ + ⌫ | Deletes the component. |

## Group components in the workspace

> Multiple components can be grouped into a single component for reuse. This is useful when combining large flows into single components (like RAG with a vector database, for example) and saving space.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Multiple components can be grouped into a single component for reuse. This is useful when combining large flows into single components, for example RAG with a vector database, and saving space.
```

1. Hold **Shift** and drag to select components.
2. Select **Group**.

> 3. The components merge into a single component.

Reviewer: The user does not perform this step so it should not be a numbered step. Make this a sentence below step 2.

4. Double-click the name and description to change them.

> 5. Save your grouped component to in the sidebar for later use.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
5. Save your grouped component to the sidebar for later use.
```

## Component version

A component's state is stored in a database, while sidebar components are like starter templates. As soon as you drag a component from the sidebar to the workspace, the two components are no longer in parity.

> The component will keep the version number it was initialized to the workspace with. Click the **Update Component** icon (exclamation mark) to bring the component up to the `latest` version. This will change the code of the component in place so you can validate that the component was updated by checking its Python code before and after updating it.

Reviewer: The first sentence is hard to parse. Please revise. Also, avoid future tense.

Author: Fixed
